is there any point
in explaining to stupid people that
they're stupid
my girlfriend asked me this question we
were out walking the other day
and right away i jumped into it and
right i think she knew what my answer
was going to be she knew
but it's still worth talking through it
was worth talking through for her it's
worth talking through for me it's going
to be worth talking through for you guys
in the audience right now because we all
feel like we want to give up sometimes
right
you got friends you got relatives and
you think
this person is stupid and it's not worth
explaining to them that they're stupid
they're wrong
and it's not worth me spending my time
or my energy explaining them
wrong but we're kind of falling into a
strange sort of cultural
double standard or inconsistency here
right because we all know
we all know that calling someone stupid
can hurt their feelings
we all know that insulting someone can
even change their lives
right if we recognize that negative
side of the sword if you want then we
have to recognize that the sword cuts
both ways
that telling someone that they're stupid
that telling someone that they're wrong
could have a tremendously positive
effect in their lives that it could
actually bring about
positive change not just negative change
that this is one of the ways all of us
take on new directions
and if you stop and reflect on your own
life probably at some point
or another somebody told you that you
were stupid or you were wrong
and it probably had a positive impact in
your life it probably made a big
difference to you
and you probably wish someone had told
you that five years earlier in some
cases
but well i wish i had gotten the message
i wish i'd figured out what i was doing
wrong earlier
in the game um
you know my father most of our
conversations he was already over
50 years old i can remember
him saying in the most podunk
ignorant way that rock and roll music
these days
isn't real music whereas it was when he
was a teenager
my father had a bachelor's degree from a
canadian university
right in hamilton right he considered
himself
a highly educated refined cosmopolitan
person
and he's talking to me and he sounds
like any idiot
who just dropped out of high school all
right
it had a big impact on him for me to
push back
for me to really say to him you sound
like a high school dropout right now you
sound like you don't know what the [ __ ]
you're talking about you sound like
exactly the kind of people
you despised when you were my age i said
how did you feel how did you feel about
the guys who were 55 years old
who said that jazz music was just n-word
music
back when you were in your 20s because i
know i know people were a little bit
more
overtly racist back then you know i
think
i think today people have other ways of
saying it about rap music or about dance
moves but you know when my father grew
up
it was right out on the surface the
racial politics of music
how how did you feel when you were in
your 20s or even your 30s whatever and
you heard people saying this about jazz
music
or rock music or the music you grew up
with and i i know i mean
i know he grew up at a time when there
were people who literally
burned the beatles records like
there were there were people who felt
that the beatles were too uh provocative
to be uh to be tolerated the teenagers
shouldn't be allowed to listen to the
records of the bills he
he grew up with all that right you know
really asking him how stupid do you
think you
sound right now as has an impact in some
ways my father had
um unique disadvantages
because of the pride he took in his own
level of
every addition his own level of
education right but
in some ways it's an advantage for
someone in my position
trying to challenge him trying to get
him to recognize his own intellectual
laziness
and his own stupidity i remember he made
some comments about
women's fashion at that time so i know
this is in the 1990s
he was over 50 years old and i said to
him
you know people who have phd's
in the history of costume design
you've visited and worked on
museums on the history of fashion you've
walked through exhibition halls
explaining this stuff to you if you were
in the company of those people
if you were at a cocktail party with
those colleagues you have
who do that kind of art history as
applied to women's fashion
would you feel ashamed will you feel
embarrassed
to say what you're saying to me right
now because you want to know what you
sound like
you sound like a high school dropout you
sound like somebody who doesn't know
what the [ __ ] he's talking about you
sound po dunk ignorant you sound like a
redneck you sound like a bumpkin
and and you know that's what you are now
these are pretty easy examples
from my decades-long experience
confronting my father
about his his ignorance there were times
when my father would say something about
the history of russia
and say something about the history of
china sometimes they said things about
the history of ancient rome
or the history of ancient greece and
they were just as stupid
as something a high school dropout would
say but most high school dropouts
probably wouldn't actually have the
self-confidence
to come out and say the incredibly
stupid things my father would say
and i'd i'd really have to talk to them
some life you know
tell me something barry do you think
there are no
specialists do you think there are no
experts
in that field do you think there's
nobody who knows
more than you do he's sitting there
talking like he's next to this
how many books have you read on that
subject barry
do you think there's nobody who's read
more books on this than you
unless i was a much younger man i'd
often be able to like you know barry
i've read
one book on this stuff
and nevertheless i've read infinitely
more about it
than you have you know you and i really
had to tell him
you sound stupid you sound like a high
school dropout
you sound ignorant you ought to be
ashamed of yourself
now my father didn't feel strange
himself my father took great delight
in acting like he was an expert on
innumerable issues
he knew absolutely nothing about uh my
mother joked about this with melissa
recently so my girlfriend melissa never
met my dad
never she said you know it's a big
difference between isil and his father
you know
isil likes to lecture about history and
politics
but i know isil only talks about things
he only knows about
something he actually knows about
whereas his father
didn't have this problem he was quite
famous for giving lectures on things
he was perfectly ignorant of she gave
some harmless examples
she said she this is true this is when i
was a young child this is before my
father triphala she said
you know isil used to ridicule his
father endlessly this is when i was a
small child
because he would say things about
different species of birds
he would walk around he would see a bird
he would make up the name of this bird
and talk about like its habitat and what
it would eat and so
it would be complete fiction it would be
completely wrong he was just
like he was a fantasist this way he
would make up stories
about what kind of bird this was and you
know and as a kid already like i got
used to being able to tell when he was
lying it was partly just i was a skeptic
about him
and i would ridicule him for a really
cool oh yeah why don't you tell us
another one i bought the the red
crested warbler that just said yeah and
it migrates here from florida huh was
that what you're telling
i was really saying you think you can
get away with making up this [ __ ] in
front of me because i'm a kid
but you can't it's true it's my mother
my mother reminds me of that yes you can
say you can't really say like father
like son
both like to lecture isil seems to
mostly like to lecture about things he's
actually read books about or actually
um look you know um we all go through it
and what i said years ago on this
channel is you know with criticism
the question is you know do you have
enough love in your heart
do you respect someone enough to
disrespect them do you care about
someone enough
to take the time and sit down with them
and really let them know that they're
wrong
and really let them know they're
screwing up and really let them know
that they're stupid
sometimes you don't sometimes you just
don't care sometimes you're just gonna
walk away
um but yeah it can it can change
people's lives
it can change people's lives for the
better it's not something that's
destructive by nature and i gotta say
this
you know guys every single person who is
intelligent
knows what it's like to be stupid okay
every single person
who's well informed knows what it's like
to be ignorant
and every single person who seems
incredibly conversant
and competent and reliable and sharp
in a particular domain they know what
it's like to be an
inept bumbler to be out of their depth
in some other domain
they know what it's like because they
can remember their own youth from years
and they know what it's like right now
because they don't always and only speak
or deal with problems
within the limit of their expertise
sometimes they
play the part with a fool they know what
it's like
we know what it's like and it's
asymmetrical
right there are people on this planet
who grew up
playing pokemon and they have
never hit the books on any topic they've
never gotten any real life experience
they don't know what it's like to
develop
their expertise their acumen their their
ability
they don't know what it's like to be an
intellectual they don't know what it's
like to be intelligent
they don't know what it's like to be
smart or good at anything
and that can continue up to any age it's
not just teenagers there are people in
their 30s 40s and 50s
and they've remained at that level so
you know there's an asymmetry there
i can say to you i know what it's like
to be stupid i know what it's like to be
ignorant i know what it's like to be an
idiot i know it's like to be wrong
i know what it's like to be misled and
lied to by propaganda sources you didn't
question
to make political statements you later
regret you later you know
wise up and realize you know so there's
a sense in which
you know there's no other combination
that's quite so
dynamic i'm i'm straight i'm
heterosexual i have no idea what it's
like to be gay
i can sympathize i can empathize i have
no idea
what it's like to be gay i've had gay
friends
and i can say them to some extent i know
what you're going through and to some
extent i don't
you know what i mean it's not like i
have that experience not to do that in
the past and then i
became straight and vice versa right if
i'm going to talk to a gay friend about
my sex life
even if that's a gay friend who had a
period of his or her life where they
were trying to live
as if they were straight there's a sense
in which they don't really know what i'm
going through
not all problems in life you know i like
this
i had someone who i've known for years
on the internet but we're not close
we've never been close yeah we're like
we're like friends on a shallow level
talk once a year someone on the internet
for years
god touched me and sent me a ton of hate
mail
um telling me i'm a misogynist
attacking my character you know and you
know what here's the truth here's the
truth
she meant well she meant well from her
perspective
she thought she was helping me right it
wasn't it wasn't dealing attention she
wasn't just trying to hurt my feelings
she wasn't trying to pray
she thought she was helping me and you
know
one of the first things i said to her in
response to this
was if you took these audio recordings
she was sending me you know voice
messages his little short audio points
if you took these audio recordings and
you saved them to your hard drive
and then you went back and listened to
them again five years from now
what do you think your opinion would be
about what you're telling me
today do you think you'd look back on
this
and think this is wise this is
intelligent this is well informed
or this is erudite because when i listen
to this
when i listen to what you're telling me
i think you sound
like a high school dropout i think you
sound like somebody with no education
at all right um
it had a big impact on her i know i
there are people i've criticized the
internet
who i had no communication with at all
like we weren't friends we didn't have
email going back and forth
and they got in touch with me years
later
years later and told me that the
criticism
i made in a youtube video explaining why
they were
stupid and wrong that had a huge impact
on them and changed their lives i have
had people
break down weeping telling me
how much the criticism i've offered
impact their lives
here on youtube i told the anecdote not
too long ago about a woman who was a phd
student getting a phd and she did some
research related to buddhism
and i criticized her work on buddhism
and she broke down weep
over that you know repeatedly i know
i know what a kind of powerful
intervention this can be to to really
confront someone this way and even just
to ask the question
like in your own eyes by your own
standards
what you're telling me right now what
you're doing now does this sound
intelligent
to you and uh
you know most people live their lives
without any kind of reflection
without any kind of mirror without any
standard
they they hold themselves to they just
don't
think of it that way they'll send me a
bunch of audio
messages a bunch of these stories and it
will never occur to them
to play that back to listen to it again
and ask themselves do i sound like an
idiot
they'll write things they'll write
comments on facebook they may write and
publish books even
and they'll never stop and read it and
think do i sound smart do i
sound stupid or five years from now if i
go back and read this what am i going to
think of the man i used to be the person
i was
you know when i wrote this they don't
look at their own writing
and think who's the best of the best in
this field like before when i was
challenging my father and say okay
you've got this ignorant ass opinion
about women's fashion in the 1990s and
how it's like worse than the 1960s or
whatever
you know okay how does that compare to
vogue magazine like are you telling me
there's a dearth of people who are
actually who have really well informed
opinions about the history of women's
fashion those people publish books too
you know they don't just write articles
for vogue magazine there's a whole
category from these
they are the best of the best in talking
about the history of fashion and
costume design aesthetics or whatever
you know
if i'm gonna publish my opinion this i'm
gonna make it known
whether it's history politics fashion
music you name it am i gonna look in the
mirror am i gonna hold myself to a
standard of excellence
not that you may be able to achieve that
today
and let's let's keep it over real there
are people in this audience right now
who have watched the youtube videos on
my channel and who have challenged
themselves to do the same thing
but better so many people
especially back when i was talking about
vegan activism there were so many people
middle-aged guys
there were a lot of middle-aged men that
watched i was doing camera
and they thought that's easy
because i make it look easy and they got
out their camera
and they got out the microphone and they
figured out
that it really wasn't easy at all now
look
you have to have a whole life cycle
analysis
for these things not just a single stage
of analysis the fact that you can't sit
down
at a microphone and talk about history
and politics the way that i talk about
it today
doesn't mean that you never will be able
to the fact that you can't
form your ideas and opinions about music
or fashion if it's something more
shallow like this
today doesn't mean you know the fact
that you are aware of
those higher standards who is the best
of the best who is the champion
you know who's the equivalent of an
olympic athlete in this area of research
this area of intellectual endeavor of
politics history the fact that you're
aware of that higher standard and you
can't
meet it today you can't compete on that
level today
doesn't mean it's a limitation for you
it doesn't mean you're going to give up
now right if you want to speak chinese
10 years from now you've got to be
willing to fail
again and again and again today and
tomorrow and for the next five years
frankly right if you want to learn
something if you want to become
proficient in something if you want to
become conversant in something
some ecology i was raised with so much
misinformation
my generation we were told so much
[ __ ] about solar panels
and wind farm generation and you know
basically the same the same ideas that
are around today but of course i mean
you know i i had to go through that i
joined the green party i had to figure
out what was propaganda was i had to
figure out what was a real solution
and what was a distraction i was
surrounded by people who thought they
were gonna
save the world by switching from plastic
bags
to reusable contacts and i see young
people going through it today they're
walking in my footsteps they don't even
know it yet
right we were all born ignorant
right the question is are you going to
be
satisfied with being ignorant until the
day that you die
are you going to go on being a fatuous
windbag like my father
like by an old man and passing down your
judgment on
rap music and rock music and women's
fashion and
joseph stalin and mao zedong and what's
going on in palestine and all that stuff
too
are you gonna go on holding yourself to
this low standard where you never grow
you never develop you never strive
to meet that standard of excellence even
if you
fail and fail and fail for the next 10
years
right the one thing i can guarantee you
is that you will have the intellectual
development that comes
from that process of striving